Pitch for extensible enums (#2679)
swiftlang/swift-evolution: proposals/NNNN-extensible-enums.md

dialects, the `@frozen` attribute when applied to enumerations managed to
introduce a difference. This difference was introduced late in the process of
evolving SE-0192, and this proposal would aim to address it.

`@frozen` is a very powerful attribute. It can be applied to both structures and
enumerations. It has a wide ranging number of effects, including exposing their
size directly as part of the ABI and providing direct access to stored
properties. However, on enumerations it happens to also exert effects on the
behaviour of switch statements.

Consider the following simple library to your favourite pizza place:

```swift
public enum PizzaFlavor {
    case hawaiian
    case pepperoni
    case cheese
}

public func bakePizza(flavor: PizzaFlavor)
```

Depending on whether the library is compiled with library evolution mode
enabled, what the caller can do with the `PizzaFlavor` enum varies. Specifically,
the behaviour in switch statements changes.

In the _standard_, "non-resilient" mode, users of the library can write
exhaustive switch statements over the enum `PizzaFlavor`:

```swift
switch pizzaFlavor {
case .hawaiian:
    throw BadFlavorError()
case .pepperoni:

>     try validateNoVegetariansEating()
> case .cheese:

Reviewer: nit, to tie in with your later example:

```suggestion
    try validateNoVegetariansEating()
    return .delicious
case .cheese:
```

  tricky. For example, `SwiftNIO` uses an enumeration to represent HTTP status
  codes. If new status codes are added, SwiftNIO needs to either mint new
  enumerations and do a deprecate-and-replace, or it needs to force these new
  status codes through the .custom enum case.

This proposal plans to address these limitations on enumerations in
non-resilient Swift.

## Proposed solution

We propose to introduce a new language feature `ExtensibleEnums` that aligns the
behaviour of enumerations in both language dialects. This will make **public**
enumerations in packages a safe default and leave maintainers the choice of
extending them later on.

In modules with the language feature enabled, developers can use the existing
`@frozen` attribute to mark an enumeration as non-extensible, allowing consumers
of the module to exhaustively switch over the cases. This makes committing to the
API of an enum an active choice for developers.

Modules consuming other modules with the language feature enabled will be forced
to add an `@unknown default:` case to any switch state for enumerations that are
not marked with `@frozen`. Importantly, this only applies to enums that are

> imported from other modules that are not in the same package. For enums inside
> the same modules of the declaring package switches is still required to be
> exhaustive and doesn't require an `@unknown default:` case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
imported from other modules that are not in the same package. For enums inside
the same modules of the declaring package switches are still required to be
exhaustive and don't require an `@unknown default:` case.
```

Since enabling a language feature applies to the whole module at once we also

> propose adding a new attribute `@extensible` analogous to `@frozen`. This

Reviewer: What's the effect of using `@extensible` on a non-public `enum`?

language feature `ExtensibleEnums` can be thought of as implicitly adding
`@extensible` to all enums that are not explicitly marked as `@frozen`.

In resilient modules, the `@extensible` attribute doesn't affect API nor ABI
since the behaviour of enumerations in modules compiled with library evolution
mode are already extensible by default. We believe that extensible enums are the
right default choice in both resilient and non-resilient modules and the new
proposed `@extensible` attribute primiarly exists to give developers a migration
path.

## Source compatibility

Enabling the language feature `ExtensibleEnums` in a module that contains public
enumerations is a source breaking change.
Changing the annotation from `@frozen` to `@extensible` is a source breaking
change. 
Changing the annotation from `@extensible` to `@frozen` is a source compatible
change and will only result in a warning code that used `@unknown default:`
clause. This allows developers to commit to the API of an enum in a non-source
breaking way.
Adding an `@extensible` annotation is a source breaking change in modules that
have **not** enabled the `ExtensibleEnums` language features or are compiled

> with resiliency.

Reviewer: It might be worth clarifying that it's only a source breaking change if `@extensible` is added to an _existing_ public enum?
